Documentation/network/concepts/masquerading.rst, before:

.. only:: not (epub or latex or html)

    WARNING: You are looking at unreleased Cilium documentation.
    Please use the official rendered version released here:
    https://docs.cilium.io

.. _concepts_masquerading:

Masquerading
============

IPv4 addresses used for pods are typically allocated from RFC1918 private
address blocks and thus, not publicly routable. Cilium will automatically
masquerade the source IP address of all traffic that is leaving the cluster to
the IPv4 address of the node as the node's IP address is already routable on
the network.

.. image:: masquerade.png
    :align: center

This behavior can be disabled with the option ``enable-ipv4-masquerade: false``
for IPv4 and ``enable-ipv6-masquerade: false`` for IPv6 traffic leaving the host.

Configuration
-------------

Setting the routable CIDR
  The default behavior is to exclude any destination within the IP allocation
  CIDR of the local node. If the pod IPs are routable across a wider network,
  that network can be specified with the option: ``ipv4-native-routing-cidr:
  10.0.0.0/8`` (or ``ipv6-native-routing-cidr: fd00::/100`` for IPv6 addresses)
  in which case all destinations within that CIDR will **not** be masqueraded.

  In the public cloud environment, if you don't configure ``ipv4-native-routing-cidr``, 
  Cilium will automatically detect the VPC CIDR range as the native routing range. 
  Cilium does not masquerade the source address for traffic that is natively
  routable in the network, because it is possible for the endpoints to
  communicate directly without NAT.
  As a result, if masquerading is enabled, traffic from pods to other 
  non-cluster resources within the same VPC (e.g., virtual machines) will be 
  routed directly without masquerading the source IP address.


Setting the masquerading interface
  See :ref:`masq_modes` for configuring the masquerading interfaces.

.. _masq_modes:

Implementation Modes
--------------------

eBPF-based
**********

.. note::

   **IPv6** BPF masquerading is a beta feature. Please provide feedback and
   file a GitHub issue if you experience any problems. IPv4 BPF masquerading is
   production-ready.

The eBPF-based implementation is the most efficient implementation. It can be enabled with
the ``bpf.masquerade=true`` helm option.

By default, BPF masquerading also enables the BPF Host-Routing mode.
See :ref:`eBPF_Host_Routing` for benefits and limitations of this mode.

The current implementation depends on :ref:`the BPF NodePort feature <kubeproxy-free>`.
The dependency will be removed in the future (:gh-issue:`13732`).

Masquerading can take place only on those devices which run the eBPF masquerading
program. This means that a packet sent from a pod to an outside address will be
masqueraded (to an output device IPv4 address), if the output device runs the program.
If not specified, the program will be automatically attached to the devices selected by
:ref:`the BPF NodePort device detection mechanism <Nodeport Devices>`.
To manually change this, use the ``devices`` helm option. Use ``cilium status``
to determine which devices the program is running on:

.. code-block:: shell-session

    $ kubectl -n kube-system exec ds/cilium -- cilium-dbg status | grep Masquerading
    Masquerading:   BPF (ip-masq-agent)   [eth0, eth1]  10.0.0.0/16

From the output above, the program is running on the ``eth0`` and ``eth1`` devices.


The eBPF-based masquerading can masquerade packets of the following L4 protocols:

- TCP
- UDP
- ICMP

.. note::

    For ICMP, support is limited to Echo request, Echo reply, and the
    error message "Destination unreachable, fragmentation required,
    and DF flag set".

By default, all packets from a pod destined to an IP address outside of the
``ipv4-native-routing-cidr`` range are masqueraded, except for packets destined
to other cluster nodes (as with ``ipv6-native-routing-cidr`` for IPv6). The
preceding output shows the exclusion CIDR of ``cilium status``
(``10.0.0.0/16``).

.. note::

    When eBPF-masquerading is enabled, traffic from pods to the External IP of
    cluster nodes will also not be masqueraded. The eBPF implementation differs
    from the iptables-based masquerading on that aspect. This limitation is
    tracked at :gh-issue:`17177`.

To allow more fine-grained control, Cilium implements `ip-masq-agent
<https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/ip-masq-agent>`_ in eBPF which can be
enabled with the ``ipMasqAgent.enabled=true`` helm option.

The eBPF-based ip-masq-agent supports the ``nonMasqueradeCIDRs``, ``masqLinkLocal``, and
``masqLinkLocalIPv6`` options set in a configuration file. A packet sent from a pod to
a destination which belongs to any CIDR from the ``nonMasqueradeCIDRs`` is not
going to be masqueraded. If the configuration file is empty, the agent will provision
the following non-masquerade CIDRs:

- ``10.0.0.0/8``
- ``172.16.0.0/12``
- ``192.168.0.0/16``
- ``100.64.0.0/10``
- ``192.0.0.0/24``
- ``192.0.2.0/24``
- ``192.88.99.0/24``
- ``198.18.0.0/15``
- ``198.51.100.0/24``
- ``203.0.113.0/24``
- ``240.0.0.0/4``

In addition, if the ``masqLinkLocal`` is not set or set to false, then
``169.254.0.0/16`` is appended to the non-masquerade CIDRs list. For IPv6, if
``masqLinkLocalIPv6`` is not set or set to false, ``fe80::/10`` is appended.


The agent uses Fsnotify to track updates to the configuration file, so the original
``resyncInterval`` option is unnecessary.

The example below shows how to configure the agent via :term:`ConfigMap` and to verify it:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../examples/kubernetes-ip-masq-agent/rfc1918.yaml
     :language: yaml

.. parsed-literal::

    $ kubectl create -n kube-system -f \ |SCM_WEB|\/examples/kubernetes-ip-masq-agent/rfc1918.yaml

    $ # Wait ~60s until the ConfigMap is propagated into the configuration file

    $ kubectl -n kube-system exec ds/cilium -- cilium-dbg bpf ipmasq list
    IP PREFIX/ADDRESS
    10.0.0.0/8
    172.16.0.0/12
    192.168.0.0/16

Alternatively, you can pass ``--set ipMasqAgent.config.nonMasqueradeCIDRs='{10.0.0.0/8,172.16.0.0/12,192.168.0.0/16}'``
and ``--set ipMasqAgent.config.masqLinkLocal=false`` (or with the corresponding
option, for IPv6) when installing Cilium via Helm to
configure the ``ip-masq-agent`` as above.

iptables-based
**************

This is the legacy implementation that will work on all kernel versions.

The default behavior will masquerade all traffic leaving on a non-Cilium
network device. This typically leads to the correct behavior. In order to
limit the network interface on which masquerading should be performed, the
option ``egress-masquerade-interfaces: eth0`` can be used.

.. note::

   It is possible to specify an interface prefix as well, by specifying
   ``eth+``, all interfaces matching the prefix ``eth`` will be used for
   masquerading.

For the advanced case where the routing layer would select different source addresses
depending on the destination CIDR, the option ``enable-masquerade-to-route-source: "true"``
can be used in order to masquerade to the source addresses rather than to the
primary interface address. The latter is then only considered as a catch-all
fallback, and for the default routes. For these advanced cases the user needs
to ensure that there are no overlapping destination CIDRs as routes on the
relevant masquerading interfaces.

With the ``enable-masquerade-to-route-source: "true"`` option, Cilium will, 
by default, use interfaces listed in the ``devices`` field as the egress masquerade interfaces 
when ``egress-masquerade-interfaces`` is empty. When ``egress-masquerade-interfaces`` is set, 
it takes precedence over ``devices`` to choose which network interface should perform masquerading.
You can set ``egress-masquerade-interfaces`` to match multiple interfaces like this: ``eth+ ens+``.

Commit message:

bpf: Enable low-part nodeport with BPF masquerade

Documentation/network/concepts/masquerading.rst, after:

.. only:: not (epub or latex or html)

    WARNING: You are looking at unreleased Cilium documentation.
    Please use the official rendered version released here:
    https://docs.cilium.io

.. _concepts_masquerading:

Masquerading
============

IPv4 addresses used for pods are typically allocated from RFC1918 private
address blocks and thus, not publicly routable. Cilium will automatically
masquerade the source IP address of all traffic that is leaving the cluster to
the IPv4 address of the node as the node's IP address is already routable on
the network.

.. image:: masquerade.png
    :align: center

This behavior can be disabled with the option ``enable-ipv4-masquerade: false``
for IPv4 and ``enable-ipv6-masquerade: false`` for IPv6 traffic leaving the host.

Configuration
-------------

Setting the routable CIDR
  The default behavior is to exclude any destination within the IP allocation
  CIDR of the local node. If the pod IPs are routable across a wider network,
  that network can be specified with the option: ``ipv4-native-routing-cidr:
  10.0.0.0/8`` (or ``ipv6-native-routing-cidr: fd00::/100`` for IPv6 addresses)
  in which case all destinations within that CIDR will **not** be masqueraded.

  In the public cloud environment, if you don't configure ``ipv4-native-routing-cidr``, 
  Cilium will automatically detect the VPC CIDR range as the native routing range. 
  Cilium does not masquerade the source address for traffic that is natively
  routable in the network, because it is possible for the endpoints to
  communicate directly without NAT.
  As a result, if masquerading is enabled, traffic from pods to other 
  non-cluster resources within the same VPC (e.g., virtual machines) will be 
  routed directly without masquerading the source IP address.


Setting the masquerading interface
  See :ref:`masq_modes` for configuring the masquerading interfaces.

.. _masq_modes:

Implementation Modes
--------------------

eBPF-based
**********

.. note::

   **IPv6** BPF masquerading is a beta feature. Please provide feedback and
   file a GitHub issue if you experience any problems. IPv4 BPF masquerading is
   production-ready.

The eBPF-based implementation is the most efficient implementation. It can be enabled with
the ``bpf.masquerade=true`` helm option.

By default, BPF masquerading also enables the BPF Host-Routing mode.
See :ref:`eBPF_Host_Routing` for benefits and limitations of this mode.

The current implementation depends on :ref:`the BPF NodePort feature <kubeproxy-free>`.
The dependency will be removed in the future (:gh-issue:`13732`).

Masquerading can take place only on those devices which run the eBPF masquerading
program. This means that a packet sent from a pod to an outside address will be
masqueraded (to an output device IPv4 address), if the output device runs the program.
If not specified, the program will be automatically attached to the devices selected by
:ref:`the BPF NodePort device detection mechanism <Nodeport Devices>`.
To manually change this, use the ``devices`` helm option. Use ``cilium status``
to determine which devices the program is running on:

.. code-block:: shell-session

    $ kubectl -n kube-system exec ds/cilium -- cilium-dbg status | grep Masquerading
    Masquerading:   BPF (ip-masq-agent)   [eth0, eth1]  10.0.0.0/16

From the output above, the program is running on the ``eth0`` and ``eth1`` devices.


The eBPF-based masquerading can masquerade packets of the following L4 protocols:

- TCP
- UDP
- ICMP

.. note::

    For ICMP, support is limited to Echo request, Echo reply, and the
    error message "Destination unreachable, fragmentation required,
    and DF flag set".

By default, all packets from a pod destined to an IP address outside of the
``ipv4-native-routing-cidr`` range are masqueraded, except for packets destined
to other cluster nodes (as with ``ipv6-native-routing-cidr`` for IPv6). The
preceding output shows the exclusion CIDR of ``cilium status``
(``10.0.0.0/16``).

.. note::

    When eBPF-masquerading is enabled, traffic from pods to the External IP of
    cluster nodes will also not be masqueraded. The eBPF implementation differs
    from the iptables-based masquerading on that aspect. This limitation is
    tracked at :gh-issue:`17177`.

Dual-port range for masquerading
**********************************

For environments that require a large number of connections to be masqueraded,
Cilium can be configured to use two separate port ranges for SNAT. This
effectively increases the number of available ports for masquerading.

When enabled, the following port ranges are used for SNAT:

- ``1024-29999``
- ``32768-65535``

This feature can be enabled with the Helm option ``enableIPv4MasqueradeDualPortRange: true`` or the agent flag ``--enable-ipv4-masq-dual-port-range``.

.. note::

   This feature requires eBPF-based ipv4 masquerading to be enabled (``enable-ipv4-masquerade=true``).

To allow more fine-grained control, Cilium implements `ip-masq-agent
<https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/ip-masq-agent>`_ in eBPF which can be
enabled with the ``ipMasqAgent.enabled=true`` helm option.

The eBPF-based ip-masq-agent supports the ``nonMasqueradeCIDRs``, ``masqLinkLocal``, and
``masqLinkLocalIPv6`` options set in a configuration file. A packet sent from a pod to
a destination which belongs to any CIDR from the ``nonMasqueradeCIDRs`` is not
going to be masqueraded. If the configuration file is empty, the agent will provision
the following non-masquerade CIDRs:

- ``10.0.0.0/8``
- ``172.16.0.0/12``
- ``192.168.0.0/16``
- ``100.64.0.0/10``
- ``192.0.0.0/24``
- ``192.0.2.0/24``
- ``192.88.99.0/24``
- ``198.18.0.0/15``
- ``198.51.100.0/24``
- ``203.0.113.0/24``
- ``240.0.0.0/4``

In addition, if the ``masqLinkLocal`` is not set or set to false, then
``169.254.0.0/16`` is appended to the non-masquerade CIDRs list. For IPv6, if
``masqLinkLocalIPv6`` is not set or set to false, ``fe80::/10`` is appended.


The agent uses Fsnotify to track updates to the configuration file, so the original
``resyncInterval`` option is unnecessary.

The example below shows how to configure the agent via :term:`ConfigMap` and to verify it:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../examples/kubernetes-ip-masq-agent/rfc1918.yaml
     :language: yaml

.. parsed-literal::

    $ kubectl create -n kube-system -f \ |SCM_WEB|\/examples/kubernetes-ip-masq-agent/rfc1918.yaml

    $ # Wait ~60s until the ConfigMap is propagated into the configuration file

    $ kubectl -n kube-system exec ds/cilium -- cilium-dbg bpf ipmasq list
    IP PREFIX/ADDRESS
    10.0.0.0/8
    172.16.0.0/12
    192.168.0.0/16

Alternatively, you can pass ``--set ipMasqAgent.config.nonMasqueradeCIDRs='{10.0.0.0/8,172.16.0.0/12,192.168.0.0/16}'``
and ``--set ipMasqAgent.config.masqLinkLocal=false`` (or with the corresponding
option, for IPv6) when installing Cilium via Helm to
configure the ``ip-masq-agent`` as above.

iptables-based
**************

This is the legacy implementation that will work on all kernel versions.

The default behavior will masquerade all traffic leaving on a non-Cilium
network device. This typically leads to the correct behavior. In order to
limit the network interface on which masquerading should be performed, the
option ``egress-masquerade-interfaces: eth0`` can be used.

.. note::

   It is possible to specify an interface prefix as well, by specifying
   ``eth+``, all interfaces matching the prefix ``eth`` will be used for
   masquerading.

For the advanced case where the routing layer would select different source addresses
depending on the destination CIDR, the option ``enable-masquerade-to-route-source: "true"``
can be used in order to masquerade to the source addresses rather than to the
primary interface address. The latter is then only considered as a catch-all
fallback, and for the default routes. For these advanced cases the user needs
to ensure that there are no overlapping destination CIDRs as routes on the
relevant masquerading interfaces.

With the ``enable-masquerade-to-route-source: "true"`` option, Cilium will, 
by default, use interfaces listed in the ``devices`` field as the egress masquerade interfaces 
when ``egress-masquerade-interfaces`` is empty. When ``egress-masquerade-interfaces`` is set, 
it takes precedence over ``devices`` to choose which network interface should perform masquerading.
You can set ``egress-masquerade-interfaces`` to match multiple interfaces like this: ``eth+ ens+``.
